--- Page 1 ---
Microbe Mission
Brown Science Olympiad Div B Invitational
February 11, 2023
Instructions:
1. You may use one 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper with information on one/both sides.
2. You may use stand-alone, non-programmable, non-graphing calculators.
3. You do not have to show your work unless you are explicitly asked to do so. Partial credit may be
awarded if correct work is shown in these cases.
4. Round all calculations to the tenths place, if necessary.
5. Tiebreakers will be given by the quality of short answer responses in numerical order.
6. All questions are worth 1 point unless marked otherwise.
7. Put your team name and team number at the top of all answer sheets.
8. Write all answers on the answer sheets provided; answers written on the exam/image sheets will not
be graded.
9. When stated, refer to images on the image sheet to answer certain questions, eg. Image #24.
10. Good luck!

--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---

--- Page 4 ---

--- Page 5 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 1 of 14
Microbe Mission
Section I [40 pts]:
1. A Giemsa stain is used primarily to diagnose which of the following [1 pt]:
(a) Plasmodium infection
(b) Giardiasis
(c) Cholera
(d) Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
(e) Both B) and c)
2. Surgical forceps are an example of a critical medical device. Which decontamination classiﬁcation is
most appropriate for surgical forceps [1 pt]?
(a) High-level disinfection
(b) Sanitization
(c) Sterilization
(d) Cleaning
(e) Both A) and c)
3. Which of the following describes a di↵erence between gram negative and gram positive bacteria (select
all that apply) [2 pts]?
(a) Gram positive bacterial cells have a thicker layer of peptidoglycan
(b) There is no outer membrane in gram positive bacteria
(c) Lipopolysaccharide is present in gram positive bacteria
(d) Teichoic acid is present in gram positive bacteria
(e) Gram positive cells have a wavy cell wall
4. Which toll-like receptor (TLR) can bind to gram negative bacteria (select all that apply)? [1 pt]
(a) TLR1
(b) TLR2
(c) TLR3
(d) TLR4
(e) TLR5
5. Which Toll-Like receptors can bind to gram positive bacteria (select all that apply)? [1 pt]
(a) TLR1
(b) TLR2
(c) TLR3
(d) TLR4
(e) TLR5

--- Page 6 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 2 of 14
Microbe Mission
6. Match each technique with its application: [2.5 pts]
a. Plaque assay
b. Histopathology
c. Gel electrophoresis
d. Streak plate technique
e. PCR
a. Separate DNA based on size and visualize it
b. Quantify infectious virus
c. Visualize changes in the structure of a tissue
d. Make many copies of a gene
e. Make a pure bacterial culture
7. Which of the following is not a component of viral phages [1 pt]?
(a) Collar
(b) Flagella
(c) Base plate
(d) Tail ﬁbers
(e) Capsid head
8. Under stressful conditions such as exposure to UV radiation, the prophage exits
DNA and
enters the
cycle: [1 pt]
(a) Host cell; Lytic
(b) Phage; Lytic
(c) Host cell; Lysogenic
(d) Phage; Lysogenic
9. You obtain a freshwater sample from your local pond and you decide to analyze your sample using
microscope cell counting and agar cultures. You observe that the number of bacteria you observe using
microscopy is
than the number of colonies observed on your culture plate. You hypothesize
this result is due to the production of hydrogen peroxide during autoclaving of your culture materials.
Catalase is an enzyme that breaks down hydrogen peroxide and you decide to rerun your culture plates
with supplemented catalase.
With your new plates, you observe
colonies than the plates
without catalase. [1 pt]
(a) Less; more
(b) Less; more
(c) Greater; more
(d) Greater; less
10. You have just ﬁnished a hard workout in the gym and you feel fatigue in your muscles. In this oxygen
deprived environment, how will your muscles produce ATP? [1 pt]
(a) Citric Acid Cycle
(b) Ethanol Fermentation
(c) Lactic Acid Fermentation
(d) Electron Transport Chain
(e) Yeast Growth
11. What is the purpose of cristae folding within the mitochondria (select all that apply)? [1 pt]
(a) To enable production of more ATP
(b) To enhance ATP production through glycolysis
(c) To enhance ATP production through the citric acid cycle

--- Page 7 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 3 of 14
Microbe Mission
(d) To enhance ATP production through the electron transport chain
(e) Store large amounts of glucose as glycogen
12. What is the goal of Acetyl CoA in the process of aerobic respiration? [1 pt]
(a) Shuttle NADH to the electron transport chain
(b) Involved in water splitting
(c) Digestion of lipids into triglycerides
(d) Essential protease in destroying cysteine bonds that denature the tertiary structure of proteins
(e) Modifying pyruvate before it enters the citric acid cycle
13. What important cation drives the electrochemical gradient in the electron transport chain to allow for
ATP production? [1 pt]
(a) H+
(b) Li+
(c) Mg2+
(d) Ca2+
(e) Al3+
14. Bruno decided to hike a mountain one day. In the beginning of his hike, he noticed towering trees and
lush vegetation on all sides, but when he approached higher elevation the trees began receding to a
barren cold rockland. Nearly absent from life, which of the following organisms could have persevered
and reproduced in this cold climate? [1 pt]
(a) Halophile
(b) Thermophile
(c) Piezophile
(d) Psychrophile
(e) All could live in this climate
15. Which of the following reasons explains why the above extremophile could persevere in colder tempera-
tures (select all that apply) [2 pts]
(a) The phospholipid bilayer contains more saturated fatty acids to enable a more rigid structure of
temperature stability
(b) A greater number of beta sheets as opposed to alpha helices in proteins
(c) Reduce production of proline to alter conformational protein structure
(d) Conducts thermal hysteresis by binding to ice crystals
(e) A high number of disulﬁde bonds to establish protein tertiary structure
16. What category of extremophiles is able to inhabit the space between rock layers and rely on the minerals
from rocks to ensure their survival? [2 pts]

--- Page 8 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 4 of 14
Microbe Mission
17. Match which of the following symbiotic relationships are mutualism, commensalism, parasitism, compe-
tition, or predator-prey (some may be used more than once) [2.5 pts]
a. Mutualism
b. Commensalism
c. Parasitism
d. Competition
e. Predator-prey
a. Barnacles living on the underside of a whale
b. Orchids growing in a tree
c. A botﬂy nesting and laying eggs inside humans
d. Doctor Fish eating calluses at a spa
e. A lion chasing an antelope
18. Candida auris is a pathogenic infection that can have complications in the bloodstream and other parts
of the body. What type of pathogen is this? [1 pt]
(a) Virus
(b) Fungi
(c) Parasite
(d) Bacteria
(e) Prokaryote
19. In what part of the body was the ﬁrst case of Candida auris isolated from? [1 pt]
(a) Ear canal
(b) Below the tongue
(c) Between toes
(d) Nasal cavity
(e) Surrounding the heart
20. List a test that doctors could perform to check if you have Candida auris: [2 pts]
21. True or False: People diagnosed with Candida auris will always display symptoms characteristic to a
bacterial infection. [1 pt]
22. What are two organisms that Wolbachia species are known to infect? [1 pt]
(a) Arthropods, Echinoderms
(b) Echinoderms, Nematodes
(c) Cnidaria, Nematodes
(d) Nematodes, Arthropods
(e) All of the following can be infected by Wolbachia
23. What is the importance of SNARE complexes? (select all that apply) [1 pt]
(a) Vesicle exocytosis
(b) Receptor mediated endocytosis
(c) Movement of proteins along the internal cytoskeleton
(d) Release of acetylcholine
(e) Flagging cellular components for degradation

--- Page 9 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 5 of 14
Microbe Mission
24. What does #Image 24 from the brain tissue depict that has been associated with brain disorders? [1
pt]
25. What is the microbial aggregate composed of predominantly? [1 pt]
(a) Alpha synuclein
(b) Tau protein
(c) Amyloid beta protein
(d) Apolipoproteins
(e) All of the above
26. Which of the following are not symptoms associated with the buildup of these microbial aggregates
(select all that apply)? [2 pt]
(a) Visual hallucination
(b) REM sleep disorders
(c) Sleepwalking
(d) Memory problems
(e) Brain encephalitis
27. In this stage of bacteriophage reproduction, degradation of the host cell’s DNA occurs and metabolic
processes are directed towards initiating phage synthesis: [1 pt]
(a) Maturation
(b) Biosynthesis
(c) Attachment
(d) Transcription
28. A disease, commonly known as “Beaver fever”, is known to colonize the lumen of the small intestine.
Which of the other agents below matches the mode of transmission of beaver fever? [1 pt]
(a) HIV
(b) Vibrio cholerae
(c) Inﬂuenza A
(d) MRSA
29. One ﬁne day, Bruno was looking at his hand and saw an abnormal ﬂuid-ﬁlled lump that appeared out
of nowhere. Which of the following might Bruno have? [1 pt]
(a) Dermoid Cyst
(b) Lipoma
(c) Sebaceous cyst
(d) Pilomatrixoma
(e) Ganglion cyst

--- Page 10 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 6 of 14
Microbe Mission
30. List a potential non-surgical treatment that Bruno could use for his abnormal bump: [2 pts]
31. Inﬂuenza A is an example of an
virus. These viruses are able to evolve quickly due to mutations
of the
proteins. [1 pt]
(a) RNA; capsid
(b) RNA; antigen
(c) DNA; capsid
(d) DNA; antigen
32. The Jarisch-Herxheimer Reaction (JHR) is a clinical phenomenon that can occur with a speciﬁc class
of bacteria in response to antibiotic treatment. It was ﬁrst described in the literature in the late 1800s,
when a dermatologist noticed a transient exacerbation of skin lesions in a syphilis patient after beginning
treatment. It has also been documented with treating lyme disease. Which of the following classes of
bacteria are associated with the JHR? [1 pt]
(a) Cocci
(b) Bacilli
(c) Sarcina
(d) Spirochete

--- Page 11 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 7 of 14
Microbe Mission
Section II [40 pts]:
Use #Image 33 from the image sheet to answer Questions 33-34.
33. Identify the speciﬁc pathogen that causes this disease highlighted in the image. [2 pts]
34. Identify the host, vector, and environment associated with this infection. [4 pts]
Bruno is unfortunately not feeling too good.
For the last couple of days, he has had
progressive and worsening abdominal pain. Fevers, chills, and nausea accompanied this.
After going to brush his teeth one morning, he notices that his eyes appear yellow in the
mirror. Through his concern, he decided to see a doctor who took an x-ray of his liver
who reports that his liver function has been severely compromised.
35. What disease might he have? [2 pts]
36. List two ways that Bruno could have gotten this disease transmitted to them? [3 pts]
Use #Image 37 from the image sheet to answer Questions 37-38.
37. Bruno’s liver appears like the right image based on the doctor’s scan. What condition does this indicate
and what are the two symptoms that can arise? [4 pts]
38. What are the four developmental stages of the condition described in Question 37. Describe each one in
one sentence or less. [6 pts]
39. List two forms of reasonable lifestyle or medical treatments that can be prescribed to help treat this
condition independent of the scenario described above? [4 pts]
Use Image #40 from the image sheet to answer Questions 40-43.
40. What is the genus of this bacteria? [2 pts]
41. Is it gram positive or gram negative? [1 pt]
42. What are two diseases that this bacteria can cause? [3 pts]
43. What are the names of the other two spiral bacteria? [3 pts]

--- Page 12 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 8 of 14
Microbe Mission
Use #Image 44 from the answer sheet to answer Questions 44-46.
44. What type of microscope imaged this legionella bacterial specimen? [2 pts]
45. What is the shape of this bacterium? [2 pts]
46. A cell recognizes this bacterial specimen through receptors on the cell surface leading to phagocytosis.
What is a way that this bacteria can avoid degradation? [4 pts]
For Question 47, look at the images identiﬁed 47a-47d on the image sheet and classify
which microscope type took each image. [2 pts each, 8 pts total]
47. Classify which microscope type took an image of the following pictures: [2 pts each, 8 pts total]
48. What is the cell surface receptor that can bind to the COVID-19 spike protein? [2 pts]
49. What are the two modes of entry that COVID-19 can use to enter the cell. Describe each mode of entry
in 1-2 sentences? [6 pts]
50. Chloroquine is an inhibitor of endosomal acidiﬁcation. How would administering this drug into cells
play an e↵ect in covid infection, and how speciﬁcally does it cause this e↵ect? [6 pts]

--- Page 13 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 9 of 14
Microbe Mission
Use Image #51 from the image sheet to answer questions 51-52.
51. List the four stages of bacterial growth in order as highlighted by the di↵erent colors in the above image:
[4 pts]
52. What could have led to the sharp drop in the last phase of the bacterial growth curve? [1 pt]
53. What are two key chemical elements (i.e. uranium) that are required for cell survival? [2 pts]
54. Bruno has been dealing with a lot of medical issues recently. This time, he identiﬁes a huge pain in
his intestine triggered by inﬂammation after eating some hamburger from a very unsanitary restaurant.
Don’t question why Bruno does these things. What kind of disease does he likely have this time? [2 pts]
55. What are two causes of this disease? [2 pts]
56. Algal blooms in the ecosystem are usually caused by what speciﬁc bacterium? [2 pts]
57. Bruno notices that one of the nearby lakes that used to be full of ﬁsh in previous years.
However,
recently, it has become covered in an algal bloom that turned the water murky. No ﬁsh seem to be
present in this lake anymore. What is the biological term of this area, and why are there a lack of ﬁsh?
[3 pts]

--- Page 14 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 10 of 14
Microbe Mission
ANSWER SHEET
Team Name:
Team Number:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
18.
19.
20. Answer below:
21.
22.
23.

--- Page 15 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 11 of 14
Microbe Mission
Team Name:
Team Number:
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30. Answer below:
31.
32.
33.
34. Answer below:
35.
36. Answer below:

--- Page 16 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 12 of 14
Microbe Mission
Team Name:
Team Number:
37. Answer below:
38. Answer below:
39. Answer below:
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

--- Page 17 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 13 of 14
Microbe Mission
Team Name:
Team Number:
46. Answer below:
47.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
48.
49. Answer below:
50. Answer below:

--- Page 18 ---
BSO Invitational
Page 14 of 14
Microbe Mission
Team Name:
Team Number:
51. Answer below:
52. Answer below:
53.
54.
55. Answer below:
56.
57. Answer below:

